

# Intro to Nietzsche

## Nietzsche and Dostoevsky Notes

All right, so a little bit of an overview of Nietzschean thought. He contrasted truth and perspectivism. There's echoes there of the battle between empiricism and rationalism.

So, here's three problems. The world's very complicated. It's hard to see. Everything you see is way more complicated than you can see. So, when I see you, people sitting here—first of all, I only see you in a tiny slice of time, no idea about your past or your future. So, you're localized in time. I only see your front. I only see your surface. I don't even see much of your surface because you're hidden by clothes. But even given that, you're very, very complicated biologically.

I can't see the familial networks that you're integrated into or the social networks that you're a part of, the biological systems that you're part and parcel of. I can't see any of the microstructures that make you up. I mean, on any of the cells that compose you or the molecular structures that compose those cells or the atomic structures that compose those molecules. All that's opaque to my vision. So, whatever I'm seeing is just a slice of what's there.

And so, the one question emerges, which is, "What is there?" Another question that emerges is, "What is the slice?" And then, another question emerges, a philosophical question, "What's the relationship between the slice?" That would be what I see and what's actually there. " How do you conceptualize that relationship?"

The empiricist might say, "All of our information comes to us from sense data." We derive all of our representations from our encounter with the real world. But the rationalist would say, "Yeah, but we can't see the real world without laying an interpretive structure on the world to screen us from what's there because it's too much and to allow only a certain amount of the world to make itself manifest to us." And so, how do we know that what we see isn't just a projection of our interpretive structure rather than what's there itself, especially given the necessity that an interpretive structure must exist?

So, Nietzsche was very interested in the relationship between perspectivism—you have to have a point of view—and the idea of objective or transcendent truth because it's not obvious how to reconcile those things. You have to bring a perspective. You have to have a perspective to live. Life itself requires a perspective, but a perspective means that you're imposing a structure on the truth.

So then, another question that emerges out of that is—and Nietzsche posed this question, as we'll see, specifically—"How do you know that the perspectives that sustain you as something that's alive are in any sense aligned with the truth of the objective world?" Is it necessarily the case that truth itself, conceptualized objectively, would be something that would serve life? And if it wasn't true that truth itself served life implicitly, then is there a truth that supersedes objective truth that's devoted to the sustenance of life?"

Nietzsche was very good at posing questions like that, and that's a very thorny question. He undertook a generalized critique of, I would say, morality and of religious thought itself. Morality—so, here's a Nietzschean idea. So, Nietzsche noted that as Europe expanded around the world, it contracted a case of indigestion. Perhaps this is what did in Rome. So, you can imagine that a culture that's confident and expansive has a united ethos and has faith in that ethos. "Here's what we believe without question, and we all believe it." And that enables us all to move forward without doubt. Well, now you go into the world, and you find all sorts of other people, other cultures, who believe other things.

Nietzsche said, "That poses—that presents two problems to you." The first problem is, "How do you know you're right?" These other people have organized themselves according to principles that aren't identical to the principles that you've organized yourself by. They worship different gods. You might say, "We know we're right because we conquered them." It's like, well, that means your ethos is that might makes right, and that's actually a relatively weak ethos.

But then, you also have the problem that when you incorporate those people, it's not like those ideas disappear and they were powerful enough to have overtaken that entire people. What makes you think that, when you pull them into your own culture, they won't overtake you? That's part of the reason that people who are more conservative are concerned about immigration. It's like, well, what carrying capacity does the society predicated on a certain ethos have with regards to bringing in people whose fundamental axiomatic perceptual structures are, in principle, somewhat different? The answer is, "We don't know," because it's good to have some novelty because that helps you grow and expand, change, and adapt. But then, do you really want to bite off more than you can chew? And the answer is, "We don't know how to balance those things."

So, Nietzsche not only said, "We're going to have the problem of many moralities, and that's a problem because which one's right? But there's a worse problem that emerges out of that, which is, if they're all different, what makes you think that there is such a thing as right?" And that's the pathway to nihilism. It's not only do you lose faith in your own system, in contrast to, say, another system, you stop being Christian and you become Buddhist, which so many people in the West have pretensions to that now. The cataclysm isn't that you shift from Christianity to Buddhism, or to Islam, for that matter, or scientific materialism. The cataclysm is that you search through all of those, and you decide that, because there's a multiplicity, nothing can stand, and then you're in the pit of nihilistic doom.

One of the consequences of that is the hopelessness and confusion that accompanies that, but also the lurking desire within you, if you're nihilistic, to re-ally yourself with something that's totalitarian so that you have some certainty. And so, that's a problem that Nietzsche knew full well was going to make itself manifest. That problem of the comparing, the comparison of multiple moralities, raises the specter that no morality is in and of itself absolute. And then what?

Then, you have no foundation to stand on. You need a reason to move forward in certainty because otherwise, you move forward in doubt. And the problem with moving forward in doubt is you don't move forward. Anything can stop you because, first of all, you're not motivated to go because you don't believe in the destination. But second, you're weak, rife with doubt. Virtually anything can stop you. That's a radical demoralization on the psychological front but also on the social front. You can't unite yourself in cooperation and competition with other people. That makes a whole culture weak.

Nietzsche also studied this deeply, this idea of ressentiment, resentment, and tied that into master-slave morality. We'll walk through that in some detail when we get to Beyond Good and Evil. He believed in the affirmation of life as an antidote to nihilism. His idea of the 'will to power' isn't a will to fascist power. Now, his sister got a hold of his notebooks after he died. She had married a radical anti-Semite and a man who was very fascist in his leanings and tilted Nietzsche's thought towards this fascist expression of a will to domination and power. But Nietzsche didn't mean by 'the will to power,' the willingness to use compulsion and force, although his thought is somewhat ambiguous on that front because he was also an admirer of the aristocratic tradition. And so, well, the devil's in the details, and Nietzsche is a nuanced thinker.

It isn't obvious to me that he successfully managed to re-present a vision of a united ethos that would replace Christian morality. In fact, I think he failed on that regard. I also think that his idea that we could, and would have to, invent our own values, I think, is fatally flawed. I say that with all due respect because Nietzsche is a remarkable thinker. The mere fact that someone didn't get all the way to the end doesn't mean that the journey they took is worthless or not worth tracking, learning from, and repeating.

Anyways, there is this affirmation of life in Nietzschean thought that he believed was something necessary morally as an antithesis to beckoning nihilism. As I said, as a person, he seems to have been admired by the people who knew him for his kindness, for example, even under duress. But Nietzsche also believed and acted out the proposition that a certain life-affirming courage was the right stance to take in relationship to the catastrophe of life. It's worth thinking about, too.

And I think it's—and I'm not attributing this thought to Nietzsche, but you can think about that as a necessary manifestation of necessary faith. And you might say, "Why is faith necessary? You could just let the facts speak for themselves." It's like, "The facts don't speak for themselves. And faith is necessary because you have to step forward into the unknown." You don't know what's going to happen. You have to determine if you're going to be guided by the principles that you uphold. It's the principles that structure your contact with the unknown.

If you throw yourself into a marriage, it's not like you know what the outcome is going to be. You don't have the facts at hand. You make a decision that you're going to manifest trust in the person that you love. You're going to link your life up with theirs, and you're going to abide by that principle as something that guides you into the chaos. That's a faith-based affirmation of life. You might ask as well, "There's a principle there that guides you in marriage, but there are similar principles that might guide you in your interaction with others or even in your decision to get up in the morning and face the catastrophe of the day. What principle should orient you?"

Well, at least with Nietzsche, one of the fundamental values he put forward was this necessity of a life-affirming perspective despite the vagaries of the evidence. He said, for example—no, we have this idea, and Freud developed this to some degree, that maybe you had a cataclysmic childhood and that put you on a bad road towards a certain neurotic pathway. And there's a determinism about that, an inevitability. It's no wonder if you were tortured so badly that you turned out so badly.

The problem with that, as Nietzsche pointed out, is there's a multitude of interpretations of even a traumatic event. Imagine you're bullied endlessly in junior high. Might say, "It's no wonder I became a bully. Look at the examples I had around me." But you can imagine and meet and read about people who drew exactly the opposite conclusion, which was, "I learned from being bullied continually that there was nothing worse, and I swore that I would never take that path." Those are opposite outcomes, so you can't lay out some narrow, simple-minded deterministic account of the outcome because the data is the same set, and the outcome is entirely different.

And so, Nietzsche knew, and that was part of his perspectivism, that any— it's one of the first postmodern interpretations of reality itself—that any event is susceptible to a multitude of interpretations, including a multitude of potentially valid interpretations, including those that compete. And so much for a simple-minded determinism in terms of something as complicated as the events of your life—what moral do you derive from your experiences?

It's like, well, that's the same question as, "What is the story of your life?" And that's another question. It's big. There is, "How much is the story of your life dependent on your will to faith?" Because you could say, "I insist upon extracting a life-affirming narrative, regardless of the catastrophes of my experience." And that's something we're thinking about. That allies faith with courage because it's necessary; I would say it's arguably necessary. All of us will undergo terrible losses in our life, including the loss of our own life, the loss of the lives of everyone around us, all those who die before us. That's definitely coming down the pipelines. There's no shortage of catastrophe in your life. So you might say, "Why not draw the most negative of possible conclusions?" And that's a real question.

One answer to that is, "Take heart and take courage. And despite all that, strive to walk uphill and do good, despite the fact that the facts, in some sense, might indicate that you have justification for doing something different." And that's worth knowing that you have that moral obligation. Arguably, you have that moral obligation to uphold the good and the valuable and the truth and the true and the beautiful despite the catastrophe of your existence, and that might include, that could easily include, unfair victimization at the hands of other people or the heavy hand of cataclysmic fate.

Certainly, Nietzsche experienced the latter in spades. He only lived to be 56 and was unbelievably ill for most of that time. His dad died very young. He had a brother that died when he was two, and there was no shortage. And he was in war quite frequently, so Nietzsche was also quite a courageous person, a good horseman. He's someone who went out there and lived the catastrophe of his life.

He developed a doctrine of the Apollonian versus the Dionysian. There's a bit of a hint of Freud there because the Dionysian was a celebration of romantic impulse—the life of emotion and motivation. The more romantic artists of the 20th century still live a lifestyle like that. It's often characterized by a kind of hedonism. But the upside of it is that there's a vitality in it, an embodied vitality, that is easy to contrast with a kind of abstracted, dry-as -dust rationality that has a kind of cowardice in it as well, because there's something to be said for throwing yourself into life, even with the possibility of error beckoning.

Nietzsche wrote a fair bit about Apollo, the spirit of rationality, versus the spirit of Dionysus, and construed the dynamism of Western culture actually as an integration of those competing forces. And you could think of the Dionysian, in some sense, as the id and as the realm of motivation, the realm of fundamental emotion, and the rational as an attempt to make that propositional and logical, and that there are pathologies of both extremes, and that something like the integrated spirit is the proper balance between rationality, rational integration, and the existence of those underlying motivational states.

So, you could think of—there's lots of ways to construe this. One of the ways you could think about your capacity to be peaceful as an adult, let's say, is that you've learned to inhibit your aggressive impulses. That puts the Apollonian and the Dionysian in antithesis. But you could also say that isn't what happens when you become unified; it's that you take your capacity for aggression and you integrate it into a higher-order structure that is rational and coherent but that still retains the dynamism of the motivation.

And I think the people that you meet who are truly alive, they're not sexless people incapable of aggression, but they are people who have those lower order motivations, those more primordial and unidirectional motivations, integrated into something like an upper unity that has a rational coherence across time, can serve its own purposes across the medium- and long-term, can integrate with other people, but still retain the dynamism of the Dionysian.

Nietzsche also noted, and I think lived out the proposition that the immersement in the Dionysian was a necessary source of revitalization. That's why people go to raves. That's why they go to rock concerts. That's why they want to dance to put themselves back under the grip of those more primordial drives. They're really subpersonalities because there's tremendous vitality associated with that, as opposed to a bloodless, abstracted, rational, top-down intellectual pretension. That's also, as I said, often indistinguishable from a kind of cowardice, cowardice in the face of the raw biology of life.

Nietzsche also—and he's Freudian in this sense—noted, and maybe he was the first philosopher, maybe, to do this, the first biologically oriented philosopher to note that, well, you're a multitude of wills, and those wills have a biological grounding. You might claim to be speaking for rationality, but God only knows what unconscious biological motivation has gripped your rationality and is using it to put forth its claims on your behavior.

Nietzsche was one of the first philosophers to ask the questions like, "What unconscious motivations —biologically instantiated—are driving even the philosophy that claims to be rational?" What force is Western rationality actually serving? Of course, the Postmodernists and the Neo-Marxists pursued that line of thought to a great degree, essentially concluding that all of our pretensions to rationality and objective truth are nothing but manifestations in some twisted sense of this Nietzschean will to power. It's all about dominance. It's all about oppression. It's all about me obtaining a position of authority and superiority in relationship to you. And all of my rational thought, even all of my scientific thought, is nothing but a manifestation of that fundamental drive.

Now, I think that's a preposterous claim, but it's not without merit, partly because there are people who orient themselves in the world like that. There are people who run on nothing but power. And it's certainly the case that the drive to domination and oppression is a major motivational drive. That doesn't mean it's the only one, and it certainly doesn't mean that it's either the superordinate one or that it should be, or inevitably is, the superordinate drive. That's where the Postmodernists and the Marxists go wrong. But underlying that is a perfectly reasonable set of propositions, which is: don't be so sure that your rational thought is merely a consequence, let's say, of the Apollonian.

So, little biographical information about Nietzsche to situate him. His father was Carl Ludwig, a pastor and teacher who only lived to be 36 years old. As I said, the evidence suggests that he died of an ailment that was quite similar to Nietzsche's. So, that's an interesting thing to keep in mind. His mother was Franziska. I don't know much about her. His sister was Elisabeth. She took care of him for 10 years after he devolved into this psychosis and sequence of strokes that eventually killed him. He learned Greek, Latin, Hebrew, and French at Schulpforta, a private school. It was a former Cistercian monastery, a very high-quality school that's still in operation today.

He was an amateur composer. When he was a young man, his compatriots included a set of wild, blasphemous, drunken poets. It sounds actually like quite a lot of fun. So, that's a good thing to see on the Nietzschean front, because my observations in my life—what's William Blake's line? "Wisdom through excess." It's a hell of a line and obviously a very dangerous ethos. But there is this idea, too, that I think is right, that especially when you're young, you have to throw yourself into excess to some degree, partly because how in the world are you going to find out where the actual boundaries are?

We know from the psychological literature, for example, that adolescents tend to do such things as shoplifting and breaking rules of that sort. You might say, "Is shoplifting, minor shoplifting, in and of itself a mark of pathology?" I can certainly say, "It's socially destabilizing and shouldn't be encouraged." But if you look at the outcomes—imagine there's two groups of adolescents, three. They break rules some of the time. That's one group. They never break rules, and they always break rules.

Well, in the they-always-break-rule categories—that's the antisocial types, childhood conduct disorder, the juvenile delinquents that become criminal. They're just breaking rules nonstop. One percent of the criminals manage 65% of the criminal activity. People specialize in antisocial behavior. It's typical Pareto distribution. A tiny proportion of the people are doing all the creative work. It applies to criminality just like it applies to the distribution of income.

So, breaking rules all the time—that's not such a good idea. It's not going to work out well for you because your life won't go well if you're criminal, especially if you're stupidly criminal. It's very hard to be criminal and not stupidly criminal because it's not an ethos that endears you to others, and it's not a good long-term strategy. And so, too much rule-breaking, that's not good.

But then, if you look in the population of teenagers that never break rules, and more and more teenagers are in that category now—they don't date, they don't have any early sexual experiences, they don't drink, they don't get their driver's license. They're very constrained and obedient. You think, "Great, they are disciplined." They are not. They're just constrained and obedient. That's not disciplined. That's not the same thing. And so, what you see in the group of young people who never break rules—much higher rates of depression and anxiety because it's not that they're moral; it's that they're cowardly and inhibited and infantile.

Nietzsche actually did a lovely job of differentiating this, and I think we'll probably run across it when we go through Beyond Good and Evil. One of the questions he brought up consistently about morality is, "Are you moral, or are you just too cowardly to break the rules?" And worse, maybe you're just too cowardly to break the rules, and you don't want to admit that, and so what you do is claim that your cowardice is actually evidence of your morality. That would be the sort of person who would shoplift in a riot, right? Because there's no real internal morality. There's actually only fear of the consequences. And then, when the consequences are lifted, someone like that will run riot when they have the opportunity.

And so, one of Nietzsche's questions of conscience, if I remember correctly, and I think that was in Twilight of the Idols, is, "Are you intimidated into obedience, or are you a moral agent?" And that's a very good thing to ask yourself whenever you think you're acting morally. It's like—let's say you refuse to be promiscuous. It's like, "Are women throwing themselves at you?" And if the answer is no, well, then what makes you think your lack of promiscuity constitutes a virtue?

The mere fact that you can't engage in something that might be regarded as immoral because you don't have the opportunity is no indication whatsoever that you're moral. It just might be an indication that no female can stand you, which is a much more likely, that's much more likely probability given the pickiness of women, even in the face of attractive men. So, I would say Nietzsche was no coward on the existential front. I like to see that there is evidence that his life was in accordance with his philosophy, that one flowed naturally out of the other and in a manner that I think was life-affirming.

1864. On graduation, he studied theology and classical philology at the University of Bonn. He was actually aiming at the ministry, and that's interesting, too, because it means that his faith, implicitly and explicitly, was of a sufficient motivating power so that the ministry was a pathway that was open to him. But after one semester, he lost his faith, which was very hard on his mother.

He's a very modern person in that regard, too, because the typical pattern—I don't know for your generation, most of you seem to be somewhere between 20 and 35, I would say—when I grew up, most people went to church, and the typical pattern would be that in adolescence, people would lose their faith and leave the church. Now, most people don't go to church, so you don't have faith to lose in the first place. But Nietzsche was an early adopter of that proclivity, let's say. And that's another bit of evidence that he was someone who was living 100 years in the future, let's say.

In 1862, in one of his earlier writings—I don't believe this was published—he argued that historical research discredited Christian teachings. And I think what he meant by that was that Biblical history couldn't be read simply as empirical history, something like that. And so, at minimum, if Christian teachings were true, they weren't true in the way that empirical history is true. And that argument still rages.

He read Ludwig Feuerbach, a philosopher who wrote a book called The Essence of Christianity. And in that book, Feuerbach argued that people created God, rather than the reverse. To modern people, that seems self-evident. And that means that we suffer from the opposite delusion that people suffered from, let's say, in the 1850s, where it was obvious that human beings were the creation of God. We think now it's obvious that God is the creation of people. And the truth of the matter is nothing is so obvious.

The world is a very complicated place, and the notion that there's a transcendent implicate order isn't a mere primitive superstition. And cognitive neuroscientists, among other people, are grappling with that reality in great detail at the present time. So we'll see how that all —you might say people stretched up to God at the same time God descended. That might be another way of thinking about it. That's certainly another alternative, and we'll explore to some degree what that means as we walk through Nietzsche's thought.

In 1865, he awakened to philosophy under the influence of Schopenhauer, who wrote a book called World as Will and Representation. And that's a lot different than world as objective reality, right? World as will—that brings this objective into it. And representation—well, what do you see when you look at the world? As we asked earlier: are your perceptions the world? And the answer is, well, the answer is, "It's complicated." Not in detail, only in a slice at minimum, and how that slice is related to the actual structure of the objective, or even if there is such a thing as the independent, transcendent objective, that's open to a serious question.

So, Schopenhauer was investigating that on the representation and will side. He believed that the knowledge of objects was phenomenal. So, a phenomenon is something that shines forth to you. Your experience is phenomenal. You perceive not objects but phenomena. And what's the difference? Well, it's complicated.

That has a function. That's why you see it. This has a function. The thing you sit on, that's a chair. Why is a bean bag and a stump—why are bean bags and stumps both chairs? They share no sets of features in common because you think, well, two things are in the same class if they share sets of features, objective features. How about a chair? How about a stump and a bean bag? No features in common. They're both made of matter. That's not a very inclusive category. Well, the answer is, "You can sit on both."

Well, that begs the question, "If the basis for your perceptual category—chair —is a function, then what makes you think that the world you see is one of objects?" And in fact, I think the answer is—I really believe this has been settled on the cognitive neuroscience and computational front—you do not see objects; you see micro-narratives. Everything you see is something that serves a purpose.

And it makes sense if you think about it. Practically, for a moment or two, you're trying to orient yourself in the world and to use the world to further your life. So, what you see in the world are those objects that afford utility. Those are affordances. That's a term that comes from the neuroscience of perception and affordance. A chair is that object that affords you the opportunity to sit, to be seated.

And see, it makes a hash of any simple empiricism because if the objects from which you're deriving your conception of the world are saturated with purpose in their microstructure, then you're not deriving a model of the objective world as a consequence of your perception because the ethos is there, to begin with.

I'd say, "Why do you see a chair?" Well, so you can sit. "Why do you need to sit?" So you can rest. "Why do you need to rest?" So you exhaust yourself. "Why not exhaust yourself?" Well, because then you die. There's a direct link between the perception of the affordance and the fact that you want to stay alive. It's embedded right in the perception. It's not a secondary overlay on an objective perception. That's well established, partly because there are so many things to see in the world.

In anything that you're looking at, you could get lost in the details forever and be unable to perceive it all. You have to narrow it dramatically. You ignore almost everything in every act of perception. You ignore virtually everything and concentrate on only something tiny. What is that? And why that? Part of the answer is, "Does it serve your will?" Is it a representation that serves your will? That would be the Nietzschean question, which would be the will to power, the will to express the essence of your life as you move forward through the confines of your life.

And so, that begs an even deeper question, "To what degree are your object perceptions so-called saturated with motivation and emotion, with biological intent right at the level of the perception, not laid above that at the level of emotion, like a secondary overlaid emotion." Because we think, as moderns, we think, "You see the objective world, and then you assign a value to that perception." It's like, "No, you can't see the world without the implicit value." It's not possible. There's no screening mechanism without the implicit value.

And then, the question becomes, "What's the structure of implicit value?" That's actually—that is the question, by the way, that is tearing our culture apart: what is the structure of implicit value? Because the left-wingers figured this out. The Postmodernists figured this out—they're students of Nietzsche as well—that our perceptions are saturated with value. But then, they leapt to the Marxist conclusion that all that value that saturates our perceptions is nothing but the expression of the will to domination and power.

And so, they said, "We need a story to orient ourselves." It's necessary by which to orient ourselves. And the story is one of domination. Well, that's a pretty damn dismal story because it means that the ruler of the world, in some cosmic sense, is nothing but the expression of the desire to dominate. They can't come up with a more—I believe, you can't come up with a more corrosive proposition than that.

And I would say that is not the proposition that Nietzsche developed. His will to power is not the same will to power at all as the Marxist formulation of power in relationship to the oppressor and the oppressed. They are not the same thing at all. It's really too bad that the same word is even involved b ecause it's hard to know. What does power mean? I can force you to do something, but to have the power to do something means to have the ability, the energy, and the material resources at hand to undertake something. In that sense, power is the mere capability to make opportunity manifest.

That's not the same thing as the willingness and ability to dominate and exploit. Even within the word 'power' itself, there's that ambivalence. But all power is not merely oppression; it's also ability. And so, I suppose the Nietzschean will to power is something like the implicit desire to manifest the full range of your abilities. It would be something like that, to expand everything you have in the service of being. It's not a preservation ethos. You don't want security. You don't want protection. In fact, the opposite in some real manner: you want to expose yourself as much as possible to the vagaries of the world to compel your development in as multidimensional manner as possible.

Kant had worked on similar problems. He believed that we couldn't see the world without imposing a priori perceptual axioms on the world. He thought that time and space themselves were axiomatic structures undergirding perception. That we didn't perceive time and space; we used them as mechanisms of perception. So, they're axiomatic. They're elements of implicit faith. Kant was very interested in exploring the domain of the axioms necessary to structure perception and was one of the first philosophers to make a very strong case that perception itself, the operation of the world, was impossible without this a priori structure.

And then, you might think—well, you can think about that biologically as well. It's not like you're a free-floating, bodiless spirit that can perceive the world. Whatever you are took 3.5 billion years to aggregate itself across time. You come into the world with this remarkable embodied structure, which lays an interpretive framework on the world. Without that, there's no possibility of perception at all. So, you bring to reality an a priori interpretive framework.

Then, what's the nature of that a priori interpretive framework? What should it be? That's another question. Not only what is it, but what should it be? And then, what does it necessarily have to be? You might say, "You could guide yourself with just aggression and lust." And why not do that? And the answer seems to be it doesn't work very well, even in relationship to fulfilling the demands of aggression and lust in the medium- to long-term. You can't play it out as an iterating strategy. You're a 2-year-old, right? It's fully impulsive. And maybe you get what you want in the second, but not in a way that makes sure it's going to be there tomorrow.

So, you can think of that as an intrinsic constraint on the manner in which will might have to make itself manifest. And then, you can think that that's complicated by the fact that not only do you have to contend with your multiple iterations across time, the fact that you're going to be here in a month and have to live with the consequences of your action, but that you have to live in a web of social relationships with others. And unless you treat them in a particular manner—well, if you treat them badly enough, they're going to be very aggressive towards you, and they're certainly not going to cooperate. And if you treat them well—whatever well means—maybe they'll fall all over themselves to offer you what you need and want.

And then, you can imagine there's only a certain number of ways that you can treat other people that is going to make that outcome happen. And you know what that is because you know what people you want to be around. And when they're at their best, you think, "I wish everyone could treat me like that all the time." And there's no real difference between that wish and wishing that you could be the person that could do that for other people. It's the same thing.

Then, the question is, "What might that pattern be?" Nietzsche associated that with his phraseology, this will to expansive power, this desire to integrate the Dionysian and the Apollonian, and to march forthrightly through life. There's not a lot of sociological analysis in Nietzsche, and I actually think that's one of his weaknesses. He's a very psychological thinker like Dostoevsky, like Freud, like Jung.

I don't believe that he paid enough attention to the minimum set of axiomatic presuppositions necessary to make a sustainable society at the family level, at the community level, at the state level, at the political level. He never got married. He never had a family. He wasn't able to integrate himself into a community, even on his own. And his intense, romantic, creative philosophizing made him a very isolated and lonesome individual. And he asked Lou Andreas-Salomé, one of the strangest women in the last 160 years—she had a large influence on Jung as well —he asked her to marry him three times, and she refused. He had a strange relationship with her and the man that she was with. It's worth looking into as a side note if you're interested in such biographical details.

But it isn't obvious that he managed his life effectively on the communal side. Jung pointed to that as a pathology not only of Nietzsche with regard to his philosophizing but to the philosophizing of other Western intellectual males who were single bachelors. So, that's a reflection of an inadequacy in their philosophical orientation to the world, arguably. And you can debate that. Can you be healthy and wise, single? And I would say, I think the answer to that is no, but you could at least debate it.

I think that if you're—because sometimes you might think you have to be the dramatic, romantic outsider who breaks all the rules to break new ground. And there's some credibility to that viewpoint. But you might say, "What makes you so sure you can be healthy in the absence of an intimate relationship and children and a family that's functional and a network of friendships and a plethora of business arrangements? What makes you think you don't need all those interactive constraints to keep yourself straight in your actions and your thought?"

And with the alternative of that is to think that you're somehow self-creating and that you can organize it all within. And that idea eventually leads to something like the radical claim of subjective identity. It's the Postmodern claim that everyone makes now, "That I am, that I am. Whatever my identity is, goes." No, it doesn't. You have to get along with other people. If you want them around, you have to negotiate your identity all the time. If your philosophy doesn't reflect that, then maybe it's wanting. I think that is an open question with regards to Nietzschean philosophy.

Military service in 1867. Apparently, he was a fine rider, another example of his ability to be physically courageous and to take part in romantic and adventurous activities in the real world. He wasn't an effete intellectual. In 1868, he met Richard Wagner, the great German composer, master of mythology, and fell under his sway. That was an indication of this Nietzschean proclivity to be enraptured by poetry and music. That's the Dionysian element of high culture, in this case, but outside of the standard philosophical realm.

There's something deeply musical and narrative about Nietzsche's writing, which gives it its dramatic force. He's a very fun philosopher to read, I would say, especially for young people, because the philosophy is so adventurous and romantic. It's not dry and academic at all, a nd so that makes it very exciting.

As I said, in 1869, he became a professor of classical philology. In 1870, he was a medical orderly in the Franco-Prussian War, which I imagine was—you can barely imagine how brutal an occupation that must have been in 1860. Filthy battlefield conditions and no antibiotics, no real modern notion of sepsis. Oh, God. Brutal, brutal. And there's some indication that perhaps that's when he contracted syphilis. That's the speculation.

He also knew Franz Liszt. Liszt was an early—he was one of the first musicians, perhaps, at least on an international scale, who produced the same sort of furor as Frank Sinatra, say, or the Beatles. He had huge crowds of adoring fans wherever he went. And what did he call Liszt? Liszt, comma, or the Art of Running After Women. And so Franz Liszt was a great musical genius. He could sightread any piece of classical music, regardless of complexity, at the first sitting. So, he could sit and open a Beethoven sonata he'd never played and play it without error. Liszt's music is also wildly romantic and builds these castles of sound, these columns of sound, that are absolutely remarkable. He was a popular sensation, like Richard Wagner in the late 1800s, in part for a while, of Nietzsche's circle of romantic deviants, let's say.

In 1872, he published The Birth of Tragedy. His colleagues evinced little enthusiasm for this radically creative work. That's something that hasn't changed in academia at all. Academia tends to be populated by people who worship the products of the intellect, their disembodied intellect. There's an element of, I would say, cowardice in relationship to the romantic that accompanies that.

We did some studies of what predicted success in graduate school in science, and creativity was correlated zero. We also looked at whether creativity, as a temperamental predictor, predicted university grades. It doesn't predict it at all. IQ does. General cognitive ability. So, smarter people do better, and conscientiousness does. So, disciplined hard work predicts success as a graduate student, and as a scientist, and as an undergraduate. It's the second-best predictor after general cognitive ability. No predictive power of creativity.

You can get cynical about that and say, "Why don't the universities reward creativity?" And the answer is, "How the hell do you reward creativity?" By definition, the creative person jumps out of the evaluative landscape. It's like, so maybe I would evaluate you on a set of criteria. But if I play within that set of criteria, I'm not creative. So, how the hell can you expect an institution to reward creativity? It couldn't be an institution if it rewarded creativity.

And that's actually the problem with institutions; they tend to ossify because you need creative input across time. Because things change, they tend to reward diligent striving towards an identified goal, which is lovely if it's the right goal, and cataclysmic if the goal has to shift. And the creative person comes along and says, "Hey, you know all that work you're doing? Well, you're going that way, and the right direction is that way." And how is an institution supposed to cope with that? What institutions generally do when that happens is die.

That's why you see these huge institutions that dominate the S&P 500, for example, or that are on the Dow Jones Index; they last for 30 years. And the typical family fortune lasts for three generations. What happens is an institution arrays itself around a creative insight, and it plays that out to exhaustion, and then it disappears. And so, maybe if you were fortunate, you could produce an institution that was dynamic enough to reconfigure itself, but that almost never happens. First of all, it's very unlikely that any institution will rise to the top to begin with, given how many institutions there are. Then you think about how unlikely it is that the same institution is going to do that twice or three times. It just doesn't happen.

Anyway, Nietzsche was a very creative philosopher, extraordinarily creative philosopher. That put him at odds with the standard academic tradition, because the standard academic tradition, too, is one of incremental progress. So, if you're a typical run-of-the-mill scientist at a university—well, first of all, most of the things that you discover just aren't true because you're not any good at what you do.

Here's a question: How many bad restaurants do there have to be for there to be one good restaurant? The answer is, "We don't know," but zero is the wrong answer. We could only have good restaurants. No, you couldn't. You have to have terrible restaurants where people stumble forward, barely mastering the beginning processes of cooking, before you can produce anyone who can be an expert at it. You need a lot of mess, and waste, and noise to get anything of value.

In the scientific community, it's the same thing. Most scientific papers simply—they're just wrong. These aren't facts that are being laid out. The ideas are shallow, and that's partly because many of them are published by graduate students. It's their first damn publication. What do you expect? They barely hit the threshold to be able to publish. What's the probability that they've discovered a new useful fact?

There's these whole societies that have gone thousands and thousands of years, even societies as dynamic as the ancient Egyptian societies, where the archeological record shows zero technological improvement in spans of thousands of years. And yet, we expect entry-level graduate students to have actually discovered a useful new fact. It's very improbable. And so, you have to expect that institutions are going to populate themselves with people who are moving incrementally at best and very, very minor flashes of creativity.

You see this in grant applications in science, too. If you put forward a grant application that contains a radically new idea, the probability that you'll get funding is zero. What you have to do, and this was especially true when I worked in the U.S. because the grants are actually quite large, and so it gets even worse, is not only do you have to do the next blatantly obvious thing that anybody who knows the literature would be familiar with and also see, because those are the people who'd be reviewing your grant, you basically have to have done the studies before you apply to fund the studies. Because what the grant agencies want is, "Have you done some pilot studies?" What that means is, "Can you ensure us that what you're hypothesizing is definitely going to make itself manifest?"

Well, if that's the horizon of creativity, you can see that that's not creative. It's like, we already did this. Now, it's not quite that bleak because what happens is people apply for a grant to do one project, and then they don't do it. They do the next thing they were planning to do. Everybody knows that. It's partly because, by the time you get the damn money, the ideas that you put forward are two years old, and if you have any sense at all, you've either dispensed with that or you're on to something new. So, it's not quite that dismal, but you get the idea.

In any case, Nietzsche's work wasn't accepted either by his colleagues or by the general public. What was it? I think we'll come up to this. One of the next books that he published, he printed 40 copies and gave most of them away to his friends. He met with very little success in his life on the publication front. It was the same with Beyond Good and Evil.

And so, it's another example—a painful example—that's echoed in the life of someone like Van Gogh, who I think Van Gogh's paintings now have sold for more than any other paintings in human history. But I think he sold two paintings his whole life. So, that's another problem with living 100 years into the future. It's like, "You're right, but it's a little early. No, you don't have a market." "This is going to be the next big thing." It's like, "Yeah, way after you're dead." So, that's not so good. That's not so good.

So, because this book, Birth of Tragedy, was not well accepted, he attempted unsuccessfully to transfer to the University of Basel, but they didn't take him, partly because they weren't very happy with his work. From '72 to '76, he worked on the Untimely Meditations collection of four essays. And in 1878, he published Human All Too Human, which was a book of aphorisms. In 1879, he resigned. He was short-sighted. His vision was extremely impaired. He had terrible migraines and serious digestive trouble, and that was just the beginning of his catastrophe.

He worked as an independent author from '79 to '89 in Switzerland, Italy, and France. When his eyesight started to fail dramatically, he actually started to type. So, one of the first great writers who turned to technology to augment his ability. In '82, he published The Gay Science. At the same time, he met Paul Rée and Lou Andreas-Salomé, which we talked about. He fell in love with her, but that wasn't returned. He proposed marriage to her three times. He planned to establish a commune with Rée and Salomé. His sister opposed that. She served as his protector and his exploiter, I suppose, at the same time—a complex relationship.

And he started writing Thus Spake Zarathustra. He wrote much of the first part in 10 days. It's a really revelatory work. It's very, very dreamlike. It's like a fairy tale. And it's written in a style—it's very unlike anything he ever wrote. Because Nietzsche is a very—even though his writing is packed with information, the bulk of his writing is very clear. He's a very, very lucid writer. It's difficult because of the density of ideas, but very lucid, w hereas Thus Spake Zarathustra has this Old Testament tone to it, both on the narrative end and on the stylistic end.

It's often the case that a revelatory idea bursts forth in image and poetic language. Generally, what people do, especially if they're writing academically and scientifically, is they move away from the dream and the image and the poem. They take all the romantic emotion out of it, and they make it into something that's semantic and propositional. And I suppose that typifies Nietzsche's more normative writings, but Thus Spake Zarathustra is far into the dream. And so it's a very, very dense and rich book, but also one that's even more difficult to unpack because it's still so dreamlike.

He tried in 1883 and failed to obtain a lecturing post at the University of Leipzig due, in his own words, to his attitude towards Christianity and the concept of God. Atheism was still a sufficiently radical stance at that point to make anyone who put forward such views, an object of skepticism to those who were more traditional in their viewpoint. In '85, he printed 40 copies of the fourth part of Zarathustra. That was it. Distributed them to friends.

He broke with his publisher, Ernst Schmeitzner, over the issue of anti-Semitism. So, anti-Semitism was starting to emerge broadly across Europe at this point, and Nietzsche was not the friend of anyone who was anti-Semitic. It was particularly interesting because, of course, the Nazis eventually attempted to claim Nietzsche as their own, partly because his writings had been warped as a consequence of being filtered through his sister, who eventually married a very prominent anti-Semite. But Nietzsche himself believed that that was—well, he said in his own words, "Anti-Semitism should be utterly rejected with cold contempt by every sensible mind."

He printed Beyond Good and Evil at his own expense, but his continued illness made prolonged work impossible. It was at that time that his sister married this well-known anti-Semite, Bernhard Förster. In '88, he published The Twilight of the Idols and the Antichrist—great books, very short. That's truly where Nietzsche was philosophizing most intensely with a hammer. Ecce Homo in 1888 as well.

In '89, Nietzsche broke down. He witnessed the flogging of a horse in Turin, threw his arms around its neck to protect it, and then collapsed, and so that's an indication of the goodness of his heart, you might say. This man was a soldier in a number of wars. He's a tough character. He's bounced all around Europe. He's sophisticated enough to be consorting with the cream of European society at that part. He's no prude, and he's no coward, and yet he's compassionate enough.

So, while this is the event that precipitated his illness, it's a great historical irony in this. So, Nietzsche—I'll do a lecture on this at one point—Nietzsche and Dostoevsky's thoughts parallel one another to a degree that's uncanny. Nietzsche is really a character in a Dostoevsky novel. That's the best way to think about it. And even more than you think now, Nietzsche was more aware of Dostoevsky than earlier scholarship had indicated. So, there might have been more explicit overlap in their thought than people have contemplated heretofore. But I think it's more a matter of parallelism in some sense. They were both people who were living 150 years into the future, and because they were both in the same place, the same set of ideas made itself manifest within them.

Dostoevsky explored that primarily in narrative, where Nietzsche took that a step further in abstraction and explored it in philosophy. This meant that Nietzsche was more explicit than Dostoevsky, because philosophers were more explicit than the novelists. But it also meant, I would say, that Dostoevsky could get even farther than Nietzsche. I'll give you an example.

In The Brothers Karamazov, two of the characters are Ivan and Alyosha. Ivan is a very charismatic atheist, and Dostoevsky put some of the most powerful pro-atheistic arguments that have ever been laid out on the page in the mouth of Ivan. Ivan wins all the arguments with Alyosha, his younger brother, who's a monastic novitiate and kind of a naive person, like a very good person and recognized as good by everyone around him, but without the charisma of his older brother and without that cutting rationalism that characterizes this brilliant Ivan. And Ivan puts forth these devastating atheistic arguments that Dostoevsky was wrestling with in his own mind.

But in the book itself, in The Brothers Karamazov, Ivan wins all the arguments, but it's clear that Alyosha is the morally superior character. He's the better man, and Dostoevsky is unable to reconcile the fact that Ivan is the master of rational argumentation with the fact that Alyosha is the better man. But he can show you that as the story unfolds. And that's the advantage of narrative over philosophy, at least in principle.

Nietzsche couldn't lay out the philosophy of someone axiomatically good like Alyosha. The philosophy hadn't matured to that point. Nietzsche, in some sense, could lay out the philosophy of Ivan, but Dostoevsky could lay out the character of Alyosha, and it was a particular goal of Dostoevsky to do this because he did something similar in a book called The Idiot. The main character in the book, The Idiot, is Prince Myshkin, who's an avatar of Christ. It's quite obvious in the text. Everyone regards him as a fool. But he's a holy fool. He's a very good man. He's a prince, and he doesn't act like an aristocratic, power-mad prince should act. He acts like a holy fool, and it's clear in the book that he's, again, the better man, and that's encapsulated in a very lovely way in the narrative.

Anyways, Dostoevsky and Nietzsche's thoughts parallel one another to an uncanny degree. So, for example, in Crime and Punishment, Dostoevsky's character, Raskolnikov, is possessed by the kind of rationalist arguments that Nietzsche knew would emerge in the aftermath of the death of God. And Raskolnikov actually tries to construe himself as a superman who can create his own values.

Now, without reference to Nietzsche—Dostoevsky didn't know about Nietzsche—Raskolnikov convinces himself to commit murder. Dostoevsky sets up the story so brilliantly because he makes Raskolnikov a sympathetic character, and he gives him every good reason to commit murder. Dostoevsky delves into this notion. It's like, "Are there circumstances under which murder becomes ethically required?"

Raskolnikov believes his sister, in a sense, is going to sell herself into prostitution to further the financing of Raskolnikov's studies to become a lawyer. Now, she's not a prostitute. She's going to marry an older man who's kind of a tyrant, a cold, bitter tyrant, who would provide her with sufficient financial resources. She believes that's morally acceptable because she wants to support her mother and her brother. Raskolnikov wants to be a lawyer so he can do all the good things that he could do with an education.

At the same time, he's under the thumb of a landlady who's grasping malevolent, nasty, horrible, corrupt character who also tyrannizes a mentally challenged niece and basically keeps her in a state of slavery. And so Raskolnikov thinks, "I could just kill the landlady. I could get her money, I could free my sister, and all the people this landlady is oppressing would be free, and so would her tyrannized niece."

And then, he's torturing himself, and he's hungry and broke and sick because he's hungry and broke, and so he can't think very clearly. But he's torturing himself with recriminations about his own moral cowardice in his inability to commit this act, which he now regards as moral. He's dispensed with the tenets of Judeo-Christian ethics. He doesn't believe that murder in and of itself is wrong, believes that if he was elevated to the point of being the superman, that he could take unto himself the power to make such decisions, and he works himself up into a frenzy.

This is part of the story, and it overlaps with this horse story in an extremely uncanny way. So, I'm going to read it to you because it's quite interesting. So, this is Raskolnikov, and he's plotting this murder, and he's up in his little horrible, wretched apartment, starving away, and he has this dream.

"Raskolnikov had a fearful dream. He dreamt he was back in his childhood in the little town of his birth. He was a child about seven years old walking into the country with his father on the evening of a holiday. It was a grey and heavy day, the country was exactly as he remembered it; indeed, he recalled it far more vividly in his dream than he had done in memory. The little town stood on a level flat as bare as the hand, not even a willow near it; only in the far distance, a copse lay, a dark blur on the very edge of the horizon. A few paces beyond the last market garden stood a tavern, a big tavern, which had always aroused in him a feeling of aversion, even of fear, when he walked by it with his father. There was always a crowd there, always shouting, laughter and abuse, hideous hoarse singing and often fighting. Drunken and horrible-looking figures were hanging about the tavern."

Russia, hey, what a place.

"He used to cling close to his father, trembling all over when he met them. Near the tavern, the road became a dusty track, the dust of which was always black. It was a winding road, and about a hundred paces further on, it turned to the right to the graveyard. In the middle of the graveyard stood a stone church with a green cupola where he used to go to mass two or three times a year with his father and mother, when a service was held in memory of his grandmother, who had long been dead, and whom he had never seen. On these occasions, they used to take on a white dish tied up in a table napkin, a special rice pudding with raisins stuck in it in the shape of a cross. He loved that church, the old-fashioned, unadorned ikons and the old priest with the shaking head. Near his grandmother's grave, which was marked by a stone, was the little grave of his younger brother who had died at six months old. He did not remember him at all, but he had been told about his little brother, and whenever he visited the graveyard he used religiously and reverently to cross himself and to bow down and kiss the little grave.

And now he dreamt that he was walking with his father past the tavern on the way to the graveyard; he was holding his father's hand and looking with dread at the tavern. A peculiar circumstance attracted his attention: there seemed to be some sort of festivity going on, there were crowds of gaily dressed townspeople, peasant women, their husbands, and riff-raff of all sorts, all singing and all more or less drunk. Near the entrance of the tavern stood a cart, but a strange cart. It was one of those big carts usually drawn by heavy cart-horses and laden with casks of wine or other heavy goods.

He always liked looking at those great cart-horses with their long manes, thick legs, and slow even pace, drawing along a perfect mountain with no appearance of effort, as though it were easier going with a load than without it. But now, strange to say, in the shafts of such a cart he saw a thin little sorrel beast, one of those peasants' nags which he had often seen straining their utmost under a heavy load of wood or hay, especially when the wheels were stuck in the mud or in a rut. And the peasants would beat them so cruelly, sometimes even about the nose and eyes, and he always felt so sorry for them that he almost cried, and his mother used to take him away from the window.

All of a sudden there was a great uproar of shouting, singing and the balalaika, and from the tavern a number of big and very drunken peasants came out, wearing red and blue shirts and coats thrown over their shoulders. 'Get in,' shouted one of them, a young, thick-necked peasant with a fleshy face red as a carrot. 'I'll take you all, get in.' But at once there was an outbreak of laughter and exclamations in the crowd.

'Take us all with a beast like that!' 'Why, Mikolka, you're crazy to put a nag like that in such a cart?' 'And this mare is twenty if she's a day, mates!' 'Get in. I'll take you all,' Mikolka shouted, leaping first into the cart, seizing the reins and standing straight up in front. 'The bay has gone with Matvey,' he shouted from the cart—'and this brute, mates, is just breaking my heart. I feel as though I could kill her. She's just eating her head off. Get in, I tell you! I'll make her gallop! She'll gallop!' and he picked up the whip, preparing himself with relish to flog the little mare. 'Get in. Come along!' The crowd laughed. 'Do you hear, she'll gallop!' 'Gallop indeed! She's not had a gallop in her for the last ten years!' 'She'll jog along!' 'Don't you mind her, mates, bring a whip each of you, get ready!' 'All right! Give it to her!'

They all clambered into Mikolka's cart, laughing and making jokes. Six men got in there and there was still room for more. They hauled in a fat, rosy-cheeked woman dressed in red cotton, in a pointed, beaded headdress and thick leather shoes; she was cracking nuts and laughing. The crowd round them was laughing too and indeed, how could they help laughing? That wretched nag was to drag all the cart load of them at a gallop! Two young fellows in the cart were just getting whips ready to help Mikolka. With a cry of 'now,' the mare tugged with all her might, but far from galloping, could scarcely move forward; she struggled with her legs, gasping and shrinking from the blows of the three whips which were showered upon her like hail. The laughter in the cart and the crowd was redoubled, but Mikolka flew into a rage and furiously thrashed the mare, as though he supposed she really could gallop.

'Let me get in, too, mates,' shouted a young man in the crowd whose appetite was aroused. 'Get in, all get in,' cried Mikolka, 'she will draw you all. I'll beat her to death.' And he thrashed and thrashed at the mare, beside himself with fury. 'Father, Father,' he cried, 'What are they doing? Father, they're beating the poor horse!' 'Come along,' said his father. 'They're drunken and foolish, they are in fun; come away, don't look!' and he tried to draw him away, but he tore himself away from his hand, and, beside himself with horror, ran to the horse.

The poor beast was in a bad way. She was gasping, standing still, then tugging again and almost falling. 'Beat her to death,' cried Mikolka. 'It's come to that. I'll do for her!' 'What are you about? Are you a Christian, you devil?' shouted an old man in the crowd. 'Did everyone, ever see the like? A wretched nag like that, pulling such a cartload?' said another. 'You'll kill her,' shouted the third. 'Don't meddle! It's my property, I'll do what I choose. Get in, more of you! Get in, all of you! I will have her go at a gallop!'

All at once, laughter broke into a roar and crowded everything: the mare, roused by the shower of blows, began feebly kicking. Even the old man could not help smiling. To think of a wretched little beast like that trying to kick! Two lads in the crowd snapped up whips and ran to the mare to beat her about the ribs. One ran each side. 'Hit her in the face, in the eyes, in the eyes,' cried Mikolka. 'Give us a song, mates,' someone shouted in the cart and everyone in the cart joined in a riotous song, jingling a tambourine and whistling. The woman went on cracking nuts and laughing.

He ran beside the mare, in front of her, saw her being whipped across the eyes, right in the eyes! He was crying. He felt choking, his tears were streaming. One of the men gave him a cut with a whip across the face, but he did not feel it. Wringing his hands and screaming, he rushed up to the grey-haired old man with the grey beard, who was shaking his head in disapproval. One woman seized him by the hand and would have taken him away, but he tore herself from him and ran back to the mare. She was almost at the last gasp, but began kicking once more.

'I'll teach you to kick,' Mikolka shouted ferociously. He threw down the whip, bent forward and picked up from the bottom of the cart a long, thick shaft, he took hold of one end with both hands and with an effort brandished it over the mare. 'He'll crush her,' was shouted round him. 'He'll kill her!' 'It's my property,' shouted Mikolka and brought the shaft down with a swinging blow. There was a sound of a heavy thud. 'Thrash her, thrash her!' 'Why have you stopped? ' shouted voices in the crowd.

And Mikolka swung the shaft a second time and it fell a second time on the spine of the luckless mare. She sank back on her haunches, but lurched forward and tugged forward with all her force, tugged first on one side and then on the other, trying to move the cart. But the six whips were attacking her in all directions, and the shaft was raised again and fell upon her a third time, then a fourth, with heavy, measured blows. He was in a fury that he could not kill her at one blow.

'She's a tough one,' was shouted in the crowd. 'She'll fall in a minute, mates, there will soon be an end of her,' said an admiring spectator in the crowd. 'Fetch an ax to finish her off,' shouted a third. 'I'll show you! Stand off,' Mikolka screamed frantically; he threw down the shaft, stooped down in the cart, and picked up an iron crow bar. 'Look out,' he shouted, and with all his might, he dealt a stunning blow at the poor mare. The blow fell, the mare staggered, sank back, tried to pull, but the bar fell again with a swinging blow on her back, and she fell on the ground like a log.

'Finish her off,' shouted Mikolka, and he leapt beside himself, out of the cart. Several young men, also flushed with drink, seized anything they could come across—whips, sticks, and poles, and ran to the dying mare. Mikolka stood on one side and began dealing random blows with the crowbar. The mare stretched out her head, drew a long breath and died.

'You butchered her,' someone shouted in the crowd. 'Why wouldn't she gallop then?' 'My property!' shouted Mikolka with bloodshot eyes, brandishing the bar in his hands. He stood as though regretting that he had nothing more to beat. 'No mistake about it, you are not a Christian,' many voices were shouting in the crowd. But the poor boy, beside himself, made his way, screaming through the crowd to the sorrel nag, put his arms around her bleeding dead head and kissed it, the eyes and the lips. Then he jumped up and flew in a frenzy with his little fists out at Mikolka. At that instant, his father, who had been running after him, snatched him up and carried him out of the crowd. 'Come along, come! Let's go home,' he said to him.

'Father! Why did they kill the poor horse!' he sobbed, but his voice broke and the words came in shrieks from his panting chest. 'They are drunk. They are brutal. It's not our business!' said his father. He put his arms round his father but he felt choked. He tried to draw breath, to cry out—and woke up. He waked up, gasping for breath, his hair soaked with perspiration, and stood up in terror. 'Thank God that was only a dream,' Raskolnikov said, sitting down under a tree and drawing deep breaths. 'But what is it? Is it some fever coming on? Such a hideous dream.' He felt utterly broken. Darkness and confusion were in his soul. He rested his elbows on his knees and leaned his head on his hands.

'Good God,' he cried. 'Can it be? Can it be that I shall really take an ax, that I shall strike her on the head, split her skull open, that I shall tread in the sticky warm blood, break the lock, steal and tremble, hide all spattered in the blood with the ax? Good God, can it be?' He was shaking like a leaf as he said this. 'But why am I going on like this?' He continued sitting up again as it were in profound amazement. 'I knew that I could never bring myself to it. So what have I been torturing myself for till now? Yesterday, when I went to make that experiment, I realized completely that I could never do it. Why am I going over it again then? Why am I hesitating? As I came down the stairs yesterday, I said to myself that it was base, loathsome, vile. The very thought of it made me feel sick and filled me with horror. No, I couldn't do it. I couldn't do it. Granted, granted, there's no flaw in all that reasoning. Oh, that all that I have concluded this last month is clear as day, true as arithmetic. My God, anyway, I couldn't bring myself to it. I couldn't do it. I couldn't do it. Why then? Why am I still?'

Well, that was the beginning of the end for Nietzsche. And that parallelism in the story and the events of his life is remarkable, given the parallelism of the ideas that they were running through. A remarkable narrative coincidence.

Nietzsche wrote a bit more after this breakdown. They call them his delusion notes. He said, one, "I had Caiaphas"—the judge of Christ—"put in fetters. And also, last year, I was crucified by the German doctors in a very drawn-out manner. Wilhelm, Bismarck, and all anti-Semites abolished." Delusional writings. He commanded the German Emperor to go to Rome to be shot. He spent years in a psychiatric clinic in Basel. At that time, the Twilight of the Idols was released, and his work received its first real public attention.

Diagnosis? Tertiary syphilis. Syphilis, a sexually transmitted infectious disease, can mimic almost any disease. It was an absolutely terrible scourge. Maybe the worst thing that hit Victorian Europe at the last part of the 1800s. Maybe manic depressive disorder, meningioma, mercury poisoning, and then this hereditary illness that his father suffered from. In '98, '99, he had two strokes, was paralyzed, unable to speak or walk, contracted pneumonia in 1900, and died on the 25th of August. Yes, so that's a good time to stop.
